ark/docs/src/content/docs/objects.mdx, before:

---
title: Objects
---

import { Tabs } from "@astrojs/starlight/components"
import SyntaxTab from "../../components/SyntaxTab.astro"

## properties

Objects definitions can include any combination of required, optional, defaultable named properties and index signatures.

<a name="properties/required" />
##### required

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const symbolicKey = Symbol()

const myObject = type({
	requiredKey: "string",
	// Nested definitions don't require additional `type` calls!
	[symbolicKey]: {
		nested: "unknown"
	}
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const symbolicKey = Symbol()

const myObject = type({
	requiredKey: type.string,
	// Nested definitions don't require additional `type` calls!
	[symbolicKey]: {
		nested: type.unknown
	}
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

<a name="properties/optional" />
##### optional

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const symbolicKey = Symbol()

const myObject = type({
	"optionalKey?": "number[]",
	[symbolicKey]: "string?"
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const symbolicKey = Symbol()

const myObject = type({
	optionalKey: type.number.array().optional(),
	[symbolicKey]: type.string.optional()
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab tuple>

```ts
const symbolicKey = Symbol()

const myObject = type({
	optionalKey: [{ type: "'script'" }, "?"],
	[symbolicKey]: [{ ark: "'type'" }, "?"]
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab spread>

```ts
const symbolicKey = Symbol()

const myObject = type({
	optionalKey: type({ type: "'script'" }, "?"),
	[symbolicKey]: type({ ark: "'type'" }, "?")
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

:::caution[Optional properties cannot be present with the value undefined]

In TypeScript, there is a setting called `exactOptionalPropertyTypes` that can be set to `true` to enforce the distinction between properties that are missing and properties that are present with the value `undefined`.

ArkType mirrors this behavior by default, so if you want to allow `undefined`, you'll need to add it to your value's definition. If you're interested in a builtin configuration option for this setting, we'd love feedback or contributions on [this issue](https://github.com/arktypeio/arktype/issues/1191).

<details>
	<summary>See an example</summary>

```ts
const myObj = type({
	"key?": "number"
})

// valid data
const validResult = myObj({})

// Error: key must be a number (was undefined)
const errorResult = myObj({ key: undefined })
```

</details>
:::

<a name="properties/defaultable" />
##### defaultable

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const myObject = type({
	defaultableKey: "boolean = false"
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const myObject = type({
	defaultableKey: type.boolean.default(false)
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab tuple>

```ts
const myObject = type({
	defaultableKey: ["boolean", "=", false]
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab spread>

```ts
const myObject = type({
	defaultableKey: type("boolean", "=", false)
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

:::caution[Optional and default only work within objects!]
Adding a `optional` or `default` to a `Type` doesn't alter its standalone behavior.

Rather, it adds metadata that changes how it works when referenced from an object or tuple.

<details>
	<summary>See an example</summary>

```ts
const optionalString = type.string.optional()

optionalString.allows(undefined) // false

const objectWithOptionalKey = type({
	foo: optionalString
})

objectWithOptionalKey.allows({}) // true
```

</details>

Prefer the key-embedded syntax (`"optionalKey?":`) where possible.
:::

<a name="properties/index" />
##### index

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const myObject = type({
	// index signatures do not require a label
	"[string]": "number.integer",
	// arbitrary string or symbolic expressions are allowed
	"[string | symbol]": "number"
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

<a name="properties/undeclared" />
##### undeclared

🚧 Coming soon ™️🚧

<a name="properties/merge" />
##### merge

🚧 Coming soon ™️🚧

<a name="properties/keyof" />
##### keyof

🚧 Coming soon ™️🚧

<a name="properties/get" />
##### get

🚧 Coming soon ™️🚧

## arrays

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const arrays = type({
	key: "string[]"
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const arrays = type({
	key: type.string.array()
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab tuple>

```ts
const arrays = type({
	key: [{ name: "string" }, "[]"]
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab spread>

```ts
const arrays = type({
	key: type({ name: "string" }, "[]")
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

<a name="arrays/lengths" />
##### lengths

Constrain an array with an inclusive or exclusive min or max length.

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const bounded = type({
	nonEmptyStringArray: "string[] > 0",
	atLeast3Integers: "number.integer[] >= 3",
	lessThan10Emails: "string.email[] < 10",
	atMost5Booleans: "boolean[] <= 5"
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const bounded = type({
	nonEmptyStringArray: type.string.array().moreThanLength(0),
	atLeast3Integers: type.keywords.number.integer.array().atLeastLength(3),
	lessThan10Emails: type.keywords.string.email.array().lessThanLength(10),
	atMost5Booleans: type.boolean.array().atMostLength(5)
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

Range expressions allow you to specify both a min and max length and use the same syntax for exclusivity.

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const range = type({
	nonEmptyStringArrayAtMostLength10: "0 < string[] <= 10",
	twoToFiveIntegers: "2 <= number.integer[] < 6"
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const range = type({
	nonEmptyStringArrayAtMostLength10: type.string
		.array()
		.moreThanLength(0)
		.atMostLength(10),
	twoToFiveIntegers: type.keywords.number.integer
		.array()
		.atLeastLength(2)
		.lessThanLength(6)
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

## tuples

Like objects, tuples are structures whose values are nested definitions. Like TypeScript, ArkType supports prefix, optional, variadic, and postfix elements, with the same restrictions about combining them.

<a name="tuples/prefix" />
##### prefix

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const myTuple = type([
	"string",
	// Object definitions can be nested in tuples- and vice versa!
	{
		coordinates: ["number", "number"]
	}
])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const myTuple = type([
	type.string,
	// Object definitions can be nested in tuples- and vice versa!
	{
		coordinates: [type.number, type.number]
	}
])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

<a name="tuples/optional" />
##### optional

Tuples can include any number of optional elements following its prefix elements.

Like in TypeScript, optional elements are mutually exclusive with postfix elements.

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const myTuple = type(["string", "boolean?", "number?"])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const myTuple = type([
	type.string,
	type.boolean.optional(),
	type.number.optional()
])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab tuple>

```ts
const myTuple = type([
	"string",
	[
		{
			name: "string"
		},
		"?"
	]
])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab spread>

```ts
const myTuple = type([
	"string",
	type(
		{
			name: "string"
		},
		"?"
	)
])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

<a name="tuples/variadic" />
##### variadic

Like in TypeScript, variadic elements allow zero or more consecutive values of a given type and may occur at most once in a tuple.

They are specified with a `"..."` operator preceding an array element.

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
// allows a string followed by zero or more numbers
const myTuple = type(["string", "...", "number[]"])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
// allows a string followed by zero or more numbers
const myTuple = type([type.string, "...", type.number.array()])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

<a name="tuples/postfix" />
##### postfix

Postfix elements are required elements following a variadic element.

They are mutually exclusive with optional elements.

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
// allows zero or more numbers followed by a boolean, then a string
const myTuple = type(["...", "number[]", "boolean", "string"])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
// allows zero or more numbers followed by a boolean, then a string
const myTuple = type(["...", type.number.array(), type.boolean, type.string])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

## dates

<a name="dates/literals" />
##### literals

Date literals represent a Date instance with an exact value.

They're primarily useful in ranges.

```ts
const literals = type({
	singleQuoted: "d'01-01-1970'",
	doubleQuoted: 'd"01-01-1970"'
})
```

<a name="dates/ranges" />
##### ranges

Constrain a Date with an inclusive or exclusive min or max.

Bounds can be expressed as either a [number](/primitives#number/literals) representing its corresponding Unix epoch value or a [Date literal](/objects#dates/literals).

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const bounded = type({
	dateInThePast: `Date < ${Date.now()}`,
	dateAfter2000: "Date > d'2000-01-01'",
	dateAtOrAfter1970: "Date >= 0"
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const bounded = type({
	dateInThePast: type.Date.earlierThan(Date.now()),
	dateAfter2000: type.Date.laterThan("2000-01-01"),
	dateAtOrAfter1970: type.Date.atOrAfter(0)
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

Range expressions allow you to specify both a min and max and use the same syntax for exclusivity.

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const tenYearsAgo = new Date()
	.setFullYear(new Date().getFullYear() - 10)
	.valueOf()

const bounded = type({
	dateInTheLast10Years: `${tenYearsAgo} <= Date < ${Date.now()}`
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const tenYearsAgo = new Date()
	.setFullYear(new Date().getFullYear() - 10)
	.valueOf()

const bounded = type({
	dateInTheLast10Years: type.Date.atOrAfter(tenYearsAgo).earlierThan(Date.now())
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

## instanceof

Most builtin instance types like `Array` and `Date` are available directly as keywords, but `instanceof` can be useful for constraining a type to one of your own classes.

<Tabs>
    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
class MyClass {}

const instances = type.instanceOf(MyClass)
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab tuple>

```ts
class MyClass {}

const instances = type({
	key: ["instanceof", MyClass]
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab spread>

```ts
class MyClass {}

const instances = type({
	key: type("instanceof", MyClass)
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

<a name="instanceof/keywords" />
##### keywords

🚧 Coming soon ™️🚧

Commit message:

Clarify date string literals being passed to Date in objects.mdx
Based on this comment: https://github.com/arktypeio/arktype/issues/518#issue-1414353250

Added because I found the lack of a standard date format in the examples confusing, forgetting that this is just how Date works.

ark/docs/src/content/docs/objects.mdx, after:

---
title: Objects
---

import { Tabs } from "@astrojs/starlight/components"
import SyntaxTab from "../../components/SyntaxTab.astro"

## properties

Objects definitions can include any combination of required, optional, defaultable named properties and index signatures.

<a name="properties/required" />
##### required

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const symbolicKey = Symbol()

const myObject = type({
	requiredKey: "string",
	// Nested definitions don't require additional `type` calls!
	[symbolicKey]: {
		nested: "unknown"
	}
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const symbolicKey = Symbol()

const myObject = type({
	requiredKey: type.string,
	// Nested definitions don't require additional `type` calls!
	[symbolicKey]: {
		nested: type.unknown
	}
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

<a name="properties/optional" />
##### optional

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const symbolicKey = Symbol()

const myObject = type({
	"optionalKey?": "number[]",
	[symbolicKey]: "string?"
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const symbolicKey = Symbol()

const myObject = type({
	optionalKey: type.number.array().optional(),
	[symbolicKey]: type.string.optional()
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab tuple>

```ts
const symbolicKey = Symbol()

const myObject = type({
	optionalKey: [{ type: "'script'" }, "?"],
	[symbolicKey]: [{ ark: "'type'" }, "?"]
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab spread>

```ts
const symbolicKey = Symbol()

const myObject = type({
	optionalKey: type({ type: "'script'" }, "?"),
	[symbolicKey]: type({ ark: "'type'" }, "?")
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

:::caution[Optional properties cannot be present with the value undefined]

In TypeScript, there is a setting called `exactOptionalPropertyTypes` that can be set to `true` to enforce the distinction between properties that are missing and properties that are present with the value `undefined`.

ArkType mirrors this behavior by default, so if you want to allow `undefined`, you'll need to add it to your value's definition. If you're interested in a builtin configuration option for this setting, we'd love feedback or contributions on [this issue](https://github.com/arktypeio/arktype/issues/1191).

<details>
	<summary>See an example</summary>

```ts
const myObj = type({
	"key?": "number"
})

// valid data
const validResult = myObj({})

// Error: key must be a number (was undefined)
const errorResult = myObj({ key: undefined })
```

</details>
:::

<a name="properties/defaultable" />
##### defaultable

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const myObject = type({
	defaultableKey: "boolean = false"
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const myObject = type({
	defaultableKey: type.boolean.default(false)
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab tuple>

```ts
const myObject = type({
	defaultableKey: ["boolean", "=", false]
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab spread>

```ts
const myObject = type({
	defaultableKey: type("boolean", "=", false)
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

:::caution[Optional and default only work within objects!]
Adding a `optional` or `default` to a `Type` doesn't alter its standalone behavior.

Rather, it adds metadata that changes how it works when referenced from an object or tuple.

<details>
	<summary>See an example</summary>

```ts
const optionalString = type.string.optional()

optionalString.allows(undefined) // false

const objectWithOptionalKey = type({
	foo: optionalString
})

objectWithOptionalKey.allows({}) // true
```

</details>

Prefer the key-embedded syntax (`"optionalKey?":`) where possible.
:::

<a name="properties/index" />
##### index

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const myObject = type({
	// index signatures do not require a label
	"[string]": "number.integer",
	// arbitrary string or symbolic expressions are allowed
	"[string | symbol]": "number"
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

<a name="properties/undeclared" />
##### undeclared

🚧 Coming soon ™️🚧

<a name="properties/merge" />
##### merge

🚧 Coming soon ™️🚧

<a name="properties/keyof" />
##### keyof

🚧 Coming soon ™️🚧

<a name="properties/get" />
##### get

🚧 Coming soon ™️🚧

## arrays

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const arrays = type({
	key: "string[]"
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const arrays = type({
	key: type.string.array()
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab tuple>

```ts
const arrays = type({
	key: [{ name: "string" }, "[]"]
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab spread>

```ts
const arrays = type({
	key: type({ name: "string" }, "[]")
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

<a name="arrays/lengths" />
##### lengths

Constrain an array with an inclusive or exclusive min or max length.

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const bounded = type({
	nonEmptyStringArray: "string[] > 0",
	atLeast3Integers: "number.integer[] >= 3",
	lessThan10Emails: "string.email[] < 10",
	atMost5Booleans: "boolean[] <= 5"
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const bounded = type({
	nonEmptyStringArray: type.string.array().moreThanLength(0),
	atLeast3Integers: type.keywords.number.integer.array().atLeastLength(3),
	lessThan10Emails: type.keywords.string.email.array().lessThanLength(10),
	atMost5Booleans: type.boolean.array().atMostLength(5)
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

Range expressions allow you to specify both a min and max length and use the same syntax for exclusivity.

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const range = type({
	nonEmptyStringArrayAtMostLength10: "0 < string[] <= 10",
	twoToFiveIntegers: "2 <= number.integer[] < 6"
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const range = type({
	nonEmptyStringArrayAtMostLength10: type.string
		.array()
		.moreThanLength(0)
		.atMostLength(10),
	twoToFiveIntegers: type.keywords.number.integer
		.array()
		.atLeastLength(2)
		.lessThanLength(6)
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

## tuples

Like objects, tuples are structures whose values are nested definitions. Like TypeScript, ArkType supports prefix, optional, variadic, and postfix elements, with the same restrictions about combining them.

<a name="tuples/prefix" />
##### prefix

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const myTuple = type([
	"string",
	// Object definitions can be nested in tuples- and vice versa!
	{
		coordinates: ["number", "number"]
	}
])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const myTuple = type([
	type.string,
	// Object definitions can be nested in tuples- and vice versa!
	{
		coordinates: [type.number, type.number]
	}
])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

<a name="tuples/optional" />
##### optional

Tuples can include any number of optional elements following its prefix elements.

Like in TypeScript, optional elements are mutually exclusive with postfix elements.

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const myTuple = type(["string", "boolean?", "number?"])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const myTuple = type([
	type.string,
	type.boolean.optional(),
	type.number.optional()
])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab tuple>

```ts
const myTuple = type([
	"string",
	[
		{
			name: "string"
		},
		"?"
	]
])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab spread>

```ts
const myTuple = type([
	"string",
	type(
		{
			name: "string"
		},
		"?"
	)
])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

<a name="tuples/variadic" />
##### variadic

Like in TypeScript, variadic elements allow zero or more consecutive values of a given type and may occur at most once in a tuple.

They are specified with a `"..."` operator preceding an array element.

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
// allows a string followed by zero or more numbers
const myTuple = type(["string", "...", "number[]"])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
// allows a string followed by zero or more numbers
const myTuple = type([type.string, "...", type.number.array()])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

<a name="tuples/postfix" />
##### postfix

Postfix elements are required elements following a variadic element.

They are mutually exclusive with optional elements.

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
// allows zero or more numbers followed by a boolean, then a string
const myTuple = type(["...", "number[]", "boolean", "string"])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
// allows zero or more numbers followed by a boolean, then a string
const myTuple = type(["...", type.number.array(), type.boolean, type.string])
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

## dates

<a name="dates/literals" />
##### literals

Date literals represent a Date instance with an exact value. Date literal string are not validated statically, just passed to Date constructor at runtime.

They're primarily useful in ranges.

```ts
const literals = type({
	singleQuoted: "d'01-01-1970'",
	doubleQuoted: 'd"01-01-1970"'
})
```

<a name="dates/ranges" />
##### ranges

Constrain a Date with an inclusive or exclusive min or max.

Bounds can be expressed as either a [number](/primitives#number/literals) representing its corresponding Unix epoch value or a [Date literal](/objects#dates/literals).

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const bounded = type({
	dateInThePast: `Date < ${Date.now()}`,
	dateAfter2000: "Date > d'2000-01-01'",
	dateAtOrAfter1970: "Date >= 0"
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const bounded = type({
	dateInThePast: type.Date.earlierThan(Date.now()),
	dateAfter2000: type.Date.laterThan("2000-01-01"),
	dateAtOrAfter1970: type.Date.atOrAfter(0)
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

Range expressions allow you to specify both a min and max and use the same syntax for exclusivity.

<Tabs>
	<SyntaxTab string>

```ts
const tenYearsAgo = new Date()
	.setFullYear(new Date().getFullYear() - 10)
	.valueOf()

const bounded = type({
	dateInTheLast10Years: `${tenYearsAgo} <= Date < ${Date.now()}`
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
const tenYearsAgo = new Date()
	.setFullYear(new Date().getFullYear() - 10)
	.valueOf()

const bounded = type({
	dateInTheLast10Years: type.Date.atOrAfter(tenYearsAgo).earlierThan(Date.now())
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

## instanceof

Most builtin instance types like `Array` and `Date` are available directly as keywords, but `instanceof` can be useful for constraining a type to one of your own classes.

<Tabs>
    <SyntaxTab fluent>

```ts
class MyClass {}

const instances = type.instanceOf(MyClass)
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab tuple>

```ts
class MyClass {}

const instances = type({
	key: ["instanceof", MyClass]
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

    <SyntaxTab spread>

```ts
class MyClass {}

const instances = type({
	key: type("instanceof", MyClass)
})
```

    </SyntaxTab>

</Tabs>

<a name="instanceof/keywords" />
##### keywords

🚧 Coming soon ™️🚧
